September Bible Study
In Touch Ministries staff September 8, 2024
What does it mean to save the world? And what does it look like to be glorified? If the answers were based solely on earthly values, we might expect domination through power and position would be the best way to achieve both. But when Jesus says the hour has come for Him to be glorified, He describes something very different: humility, obedience, and even laying down His life.
Illustration by Abbey Lossing
The Jews hope the Messiah will free them from Roman rule (Jeremiah 23:5-6). So, as Jesus enters Jerusalem for Passover, the crowds there for the festival flock around Him, expecting that if He is really the Messiah, surely He’ll be victorious. Meanwhile, a confrontation between the religious leaders and Jesus seems inevitable.
This passage shows Jesus is both human and divine. Though weary and troubled by the suffering He’s about to face, He submits fully to God’s will and is prepared to complete this sacrificial act of divine love and obedience.
The crowd expects victory over their enemies through divine might. What struggles are they experiencing that color their expectations? How does Jesus’ soon-to-be death and resurrection deliver them from those hardships in a more abundant way?
Notice the way Jesus describes what’s about to happen. Instead of saying, “I’m going to be arrested and killed,” He says, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified” (v. 23). Not killed but glorified. That sounds like victory, doesn’t it? Jesus seems to confirm what everyone hopes: Yes, this is it—the time, the place, and the person. The Messiah is coming at last to confront the violent oppressive powers. His reign begins now.
But then Jesus likens Himself to a tiny grain of wheat. What good is that, on its own? What can it possibly feed, nurture, or save? Yet if that single grain falls to the ground and dies, it can become the seed of new life—a full, thriving stalk of wheat teeming with seeds, bringing hope for the future to many.  So, how is God’s definition of glory different from ours?
Reread verses 24-25. Some of Jesus’ words may have sounded like riddles to His listeners—and they may to us as well. In what way does “losing our life” help us keep it?
Jesus explains that to be part of what happens next, we must serve and follow Him—even if it involves great sacrifice.
Later on, long after the Lord’s death, resurrection, reunion with His disciples, and ascension, Paul will write to the Philippians, reminding them that believers are to follow Christ’s example of sacrificial love. Read Philippians 2:5-11. How did Jesus’ human death become an act of saving obedience? What attitude does this invite us to embrace?
In verses 6-8, we read of Jesus’ willingness to give up His rightful status and instead take a position of servanthood and humility—which is the reason that God glorified Christ (vv. 9-10). What does this indicate about God’s character and priorities? How can we better align our priorities with His?
Even though He is distressed, Jesus prays, “Father, glorify Your name!” (John 12:28).
How does looking to God in times of suffering and anxiety help you endure? What in this story gives assurance that Jesus will never leave you?
Scripture describes the Lord not as a forceful tyrant but a servant. Recognizing that He saved us by laying down His life rather than using violence or power may change our view of Him, ourselves, and others. As our attitude changes to become like Christ’s, may we too respond with sacrificial love.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org