In Touch Ministries staff June 1, 2025
The book of Judges describes a bleak period of Israel’s history, when “everyone did what was right in his own eyes” (Judges 21:25). Yet against this dismal backdrop, there were times of bright hope, when a godly leader resolutely followed God and pointed the way to Him. Deborah was one such luminary—a prophet, judge, and military leader who used her authority to serve both God and her people.
Illustration by Xoana Herrera
At the beginning of Judges, the Israelites were settling into a new land and identity with a command to stay faithful. Yet the nation’s leaders became increasingly violent, corrupt, and evil, repeating the same cycle over and over again: sin, consequence, repentance—then more sin, more consequence ...
Deborah was a prophetess and a well-respected leader. She held court under the palm tree, decided cases, spoke as God’s voice, and commanded the army.
The Israelites looked to Deborah to provide spiritual, social, political, and military guidance. In fact, her general—Barak—wouldn’t even go into battle unless she accompanied him (v. 8). If she said God wanted something, the people believed her. What do you think are some upsides and downsides to having that level of responsibility? In what ways might being a woman affect the role?
The text mentions no children, but Deborah is memorialized in song as “a mother in Israel” (Judges 5:7). How might a strong leader resemble a good parent? What words from the story indicate how Deborah fulfilled this role?
Scholars suggest Deborah’s story was written to parallel that of Moses. Scripture shows the two leaders were trusted to decide disputes, to speak as the voice of God, and to battle opposition. And both, after seeing their opponents thwarted by a flooding river, led a song of victory (Exodus 15:1-18; Judges 5:1-31). In this way, the book of Judges underscores that even in dark times, the Lord can work through godly leaders. When have you seen a powerful leader submit and surrender to God in the face of terrifying enemies? How can this be “parental”?
Deborah’s godly wisdom and leadership resulted in four decades of peace for the Israelites (5:31), placing her in sharp contrast to most of the other judges of that time period.
The rest of Judges 4 describes a gruesome battle. But under Deborah’s authority, Sisera’s army was defeated. Not only was the nation of Israel preserved; it appears to have flourished (5:31). Describe a time when you experienced strong and/or poor leadership, and the outcomes each brought. What might account for the difference?
After Israel’s victory, Deborah and Barak led the nation in song. They retold the story of their epic battle, giving honor and glory to God and recommitting to serve Him. At the beginning of their song, they rejoiced that people “offered themselves willingly” (5:2). When have you brought your life and skills in worship and service to God? How can you do so today?
The last chapter of Proverbs describes various tasks a godly woman might fulfill. We see Deborah, like “the Proverbs 31 woman,” using God-given abilities to lead and provide. And she is praised for her victories.
After briefly reviewing your own skills and spiritual gifts, note how Deborah made the most of hers. Though her circumstances were extremely difficult, she didn’t turn away. Drawing from her wisdom, courage, leadership abilities, and righteousness, she persevered to care for her people. And she helped to create an environment in which they could thrive.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org