In Touch Ministries staff December 8, 2024
God has purpose in our pain. When we’re in the middle of what looks like a no-way-out calamity, the idea that something positive could one day result from our suffering can seem impossible. Yet God, the master weaver and redeemer of circumstances, allows only what will serve His purposes and ultimately benefit His children. Our trust in Him grows as we recall His track record of faithfulness in both our life and the pages of Scripture. Daniel’s story shows God truly can “do far more abundantly beyond all that we ask or think” (Ephesians 3:20). His multidirectional purposes resulted in blessings for the young Jewish exile and also had long-range implications for a larger, familiar story.
Illustration by Abbey Lossing
In the sixth century B.C., Nebuchadnezzar looted and demolished Solomon’s temple, destroyed Jerusalem, and deported all but the poorest Jewish citizens to Babylon.
Daniel 1:1-21; Daniel 2:1-49
Scripture says that regardless of what our street address may be, we as believers are citizens of heaven (Philippians 3:20).
Daniel and his friends were young men with every advantage, but war and exile changed their plans (Daniel 1:3-6). Did you ever find yourself somewhere you didn’t want to be—in a place or situation where you felt trapped and helpless? How did you get through that time? Describe the emotions you experienced along the way.
In verses 8-13, Daniel submitted to his situation but proposed a compromise that allowed him and his friends to honor the Lord. And God bestowed blessings on them—not only of physical vigor, intellectual capacity, and supernatural understanding but also of favor with their Babylonian overseer and credibility with the king himself (vv. 15-17, 20). When your life has necessitated yielding to tough circumstances, did you ever sense God’s presence and blessing? How?
Read 1 Peter 2:11-12. Name ways we “temporary residents and foreigners” (NLT) can “be careful to live properly among ... unbelieving neighbors.”
A conquering nation would rename captives, forcing them to leave behind their old culture and assimilate to the new. Daniel and his friends had Hebrew names that honored Jehovah. But in Babylon, they were given names referring to local deities. Imagine being in their place. How might a forced name change affect you?
Having been awakened by a terrifying nightmare, Nebuchadnezzar commanded his advisors to tell him both what the dream was and its meaning. When none could, the enraged king ordered that the wise men be killed (Daniel 2:5, Daniel 2:11-13), no doubt leaving them distraught at the unreasonable sentence.
Read Daniel 2:14-30. List steps Daniel took in dealing with the crisis. How might you apply his approach in tense situations of your own?
After God gave Daniel knowledge of the dream and its interpretation, what was the king’s reaction (vv. 46-47)? Once the wise men’s death sentence was lifted, what do you suppose they thought and said about Daniel? About God?
Centuries later, “magi from the east” followed a star to Jerusalem so they could worship the King of the Jews (Matthew 2:1). The Lord saw to it that these Gentile officials knew to look for the promised Jewish King.
Daniel became chief among the magi of his time (Daniel 4:9; Daniel 5:11), and his God saved their lives. That explains why his prophecies would have circulated widely in the East. Though our personal experience likely won’t include supernatural details as dramatic as Daniel’s did, we can still have credibility with those around us. A life of integrity that reflects Jesus and conveys love will create curiosity and draw others to the Lord.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org