In Touch Ministries staff October 4, 2024
Is being a royal really so great? Queen Esther probably wouldn’t say so. She likely would have agreed with the assessment by 18th-century writer Hannah More—that to wear a crown requires one to “sink beneath a load of splendid care!” While the biblical book of Esther is unusual in that God is never mentioned by name, it’s obvious that the queen recognized her duty to protect His people.
Illustration by Vincent Mahé
With the help of her cousin Mordecai, Esther—a beautiful Jewish girl living in Persia—was chosen to be queen by the Persian King Xerxes (Ahasuerus). Though her role was a privileged one, Esther was still subject to the dangerous whims and unchallengeable edicts of a powerful man.
Stressful situations are not uncommon for God’s people. The Lord doesn’t bring evil upon us, but He will use it to refine our character.
Since the practice is no longer familiar, it’s easy to gloss over Bible passages that describe tearing one’s garment and wailing in sackcloth and ashes (v. 1). But these actions were undertaken only in extreme grief, despair, or repentance, such as here, when the Persian population had been given permission to slaughter any Jews living among them (Esther 3:13). Try to imagine the emotions Esther’s people must have felt upon learning they would soon be killed violently without reason. Do Mordecai’s actions resonate more deeply in light of the situation God’s people faced? How so?
We are told that Queen Esther was “seized by great fear” (4:4). The Hebrew words used to describe her reaction mean “writhing in pain” and “shaking with fear.” How does Esther’s distress make her relatable to you, despite her lofty position and the fact that you’re separated from her by 25 centuries?
What was the first thing Esther did after hearing of Mordecai’s despair? In what way does her action show presence of mind and concern for others, despite her own trepidation?
Mordecai urged Esther to use her position, at great personal risk, to save her people.
Reread verse 11. When Esther explained the obstacle to Mordecai’s suggested intervention, he replied, “Who knows whether you have not attained royalty for such a time as this?” (v. 14). How was he asking her to view position and service? Can you think of a situation when a service or act of courage was (or might someday be) required of you because of a position or blessing God has bestowed?
When we feel strong, pride can become a stumbling block. Humility combined with power is rare but essential if we wish to succeed wherever God has placed us. Where do you see humility in this story?
Throughout the chapter, Esther showed not only courage and selflessness but also decisiveness, leadership, and prayerfulness. In addition, she exhibited unity with and concern for her people. Identify moments when each of these characteristics is present.
Even in our most difficult times, we, too, can push through fear, pray, and rely on God for the outcome.
As is the case with many stories in the Bible, Queen Esther’s teaches inspiring lessons. From this account, we learn that our worst trials needn’t crush us. And with wisdom, we can use the Lord’s blessings as a springboard to help others. Let that motivate you to stand tall in Christ and to obey the promptings of God’s Holy Spirit.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org