A firsthand account of God’s Word transforming lives throughout Southeast Asia
Joseph Miller July 13, 2024
The convoy of trucks steadily climbed a rock-laden clay road, thanks to the four-wheel drive. Rain clouds gathered in the distance, and diffused sunlight made the green leaves pop with color. As we neared the village of San Mateo on the Philippine island of Mindanao, scattered thatched-roof huts emerged throughout the jungle.
At the invitation of Unknown Nations, a ministry dedicated to Great Commission work around the world, storytellers from In Touch Ministries witnessed God at work in Southeast Asia. Our Messenger audio Bible has served as a critical tool in discipleship and evangelism in the region. This solar-powered device combines the Old and New Testaments with foundational sermons from Dr. Charles Stanley. Over the span of two weeks we would travel throughout Southeast Asia—first to the Philippines and then Indonesia—to hear stories of how the Lord is moving in unique, surprising ways.
The Heart of a Pastor
In the Philippines, we visited village after village, following Alex Montanando. Born and raised on Mindanao, Alex is a  pastor to pastors, and he regularly heads out to these remote areas to teach, preach, consult, and bring supplies. Every time he leaves the city of Cagayan de Oro, where his church is located, it costs time and resources. But to Alex, it’s a critical part of the Great Commission. An affable man in his early 60s, he exudes warmth and care to friends and strangers alike. Generations of church members look up to Alex, and out of respect for him and love for the Lord, they volunteer much of their time on these excursions.
Pastor Alex Montanando at his church in Cagayan de Oro. Photography by David Hogsholt.
Inside the village church, Alex sat with a handful of locals, listening intently as they shared about their spiritual lives. A look of concern crossed Alex’s face when one woman told him the group hadn’t been baptized yet. Tenderly he took time to teach a lesson on the importance of the sacrament and why believers receive it. As a sign of respect, he said he’d prefer that the baptisms be conducted by their local pastor rather than by Alex himself.
Outside, he spoke with a young woman named Amelita. Eight months pregnant, she shared her thoughts and concerns about becoming a mother. Though most locals get by through farming, Amelita was able to open up a sari-sari store, which is a small shop similar to a bodega. Alex prayed for her and the child and said his group would keep up with her in the coming months as they planned return visits. Since their aim is to care for more than just spiritual needs, several of these trips will also provide practical supplies like food or personal hygiene items.
Joy Found in the One True God
Though the teachings of Christianity have long been part of the nation’s history, many people in the Philippines are not acquainted with the gospel. They often feel duty bound to morality, without understanding the Father’s love that sent His Son to die for our sins. And villagers, far removed from city life, often practice ancestor worship and other forms of idolatry. One reason that Alex and his team treasure the Messenger, or “talking Bible” as some call it, is that the Word directly disciples new believers and reduces the likelihood of false teachings—a constant problem local pastors wrestle with.
In a remote Filipino village, believers praise the Lord during a special service.
One such pastor—a man named Danny—looks to Alex as a mentor. When we visited a church of his, our team was greeted by a beautiful chorus of voices singing, “You are welcome here!” Clad in traditional clothing with bright red and yellow checkered patterns, the singers danced in a circle, excited to meet and host those seen as responsible for bringing the audio Word of God to them in their own heart language. As in many corners of the world, literacy rates are low in cultures where the majority are oral learners. Their joy reflects the inner freedom they’ve found in giving their lives to Jesus.
Back in Cagayan de Oro on a Sunday morning, a few of us were whisked away to visit a small church situated in the city slums. As our guide walked us through winding narrow alleyways, we could begin to make out the sound of amplified music. Turning the corner, we were invited into a humble concrete block building slightly larger than a one-car garage. Squeezed in at the front, a worship band played praise music, which poured out the open windows into the surrounding streets. Congregants clad in their very best sang out with grateful, exuberant hearts. The joy matched the level of the believers in the villages—something that became a common thread in our experiences on Mindanao.
One Region, Different Spiritual Challenges
Though they are neighboring island nations in Southeast Asia, the Philippines and Indonesia are marked by significant differences in history and culture. And that extends to the presence of Christianity and the challenges believers face. While idol worship and false teaching are primary issues in the Philippines, the challenges for many Indonesian Christians center on persecution. Because of security concerns, the names of the people we met in Indonesia have been changed. And specifics on the locations will remain vague—as the most populous Muslim nation in the world, Indonesia has a tenuous history with Christianity. In some locations, it’s tolerated; in others, persecution can be more extreme.
Putting Faith to the Test
Our host in Indonesia was a pastor and leader named Gede. An upbeat, jovial man in his 40s, Gede operates much the way Alex does in the Philippines—as a natural connector of people in need with the resources they’re seeking. In our time with Gede, it became common for him to introduce us to friends of his and then fade into the background. The kind of missionary work he’s engaged in has drawn scrutiny in the past from people hostile to the message of Jesus. The lower a profile he can keep, the better.
The first friend Gede wanted to introduce us to is a gentleman who goes by the name Mr. K. One of the first believers in his village, Mr. K has lived under the shadow of suspicion ever since word got out that he left behind Hinduism to follow Jesus. But he can’t avoid looking different to the people around him—neighbors noticed an immediate difference in him when he no longer got into loud arguments with his wife, who also had become a Christian.
Mr. K at his family compound in Indonesia
As Mr. K cut up durian, a spiky fruit native to the tropics of Southeast Asia, we heard more of their story from both Gede and Joko, Mr. K’s son-in-law. A man in his mid-40s, Joko is a pastor to a local congregation. He was the first in the family to meet Jesus: Years before, while Joko was working on a cruise ship, a Filipino roommate introduced him to Christianity, asking pointed questions that he couldn’t quite shake. With a marriage on the rocks and family trouble back home, Joko found himself receptive to the peace that his Filipino coworker exhibited.
Joko eventually led his in-laws to the Lord, and now they all serve the local believers by hosting services on their property. When Mr. K became a believer, he faced immediate threats from the community. In their culture, Hinduism holds a tight grip, and village elders have power to make major life decisions for others. Mr. K was brought before a local court several times over the issue of changing faiths. One man in particular tried to strip him of his property. But this man had an affair with a woman and died one night while away with her in the city, and this turn of events looked to the locals like God (or one of their “gods”) cursing that man. Mr. K was then left alone, aside from one issue—authorities commanded that he tear down the ancestral temple that had sat in the corner of his property for generations. For each Hindu family, the temple and acts of worship surrounding it are signs of devotion. But they reasoned that since he was no longer a Hindu, he shouldn’t have a temple. Mr. K gladly destroyed it. During our visit, we felt the crunch of the discarded materials under our feet—broken stone and wood in a useless heap.
Now, casting a shadow over that pile is a large, newly constructed building, gleaming white and the focal point on their property. In the weeks before we arrived, they had just put the finishing touches on what they call a “house of prayer.” Because of ongoing scrutiny of their newfound faith, they cannot call it a church. But that’s OK, Joko teases: “It’s a house, and we pray in it!” And they also use the Messenger as a critical tool in their evangelism and discipleship. As a symbol of their intentions, the family invited locals to come join them for a shared meal at the portico. Locals are slowly warming up to the idea of these longtime neighbors now following a different path. After all, their warmth and hospitality done in the love of God is irresistible.
Joko in front of the House of Prayer
An Unloved Couple Meets an Irresistible Calling
In a different part of the island, Gede took us to meet an unlikely couple who serve as leaders in the local church. When we entered a humble storefront shop that doubles as their home, Neli sat on the floor, wrapping packages of peyek, a local delicacy. Sounds of bubbling oil came from the back, where her husband Banu stood frying the treats. Their business centers on the making and selling of this simple flour and peanut dish—but it’s enough to live on and fund their daily ministry. Joy-filled believers, Banu and Neli have the warmest, most inviting smiles. People come to them for all kinds of advice—and even prayer. Locals believe they’ve been blessed by God, and they’re right: Banu and Neli were both told by their families that their futures were doomed and they’d never amount to anything. But God had a different agenda in mind.
Crippled since birth by polio, Neli cannot walk. Hunched to the ground, she has to crawl “crab-like” anywhere she goes. Medical conditions like this are still seen as a curse in certain parts of the world, and Neli was practically cast away by her family. Banu himself has disabilities stemming from a train accident in which he almost lost his life. He’s missing a leg and much of one arm but has found work-arounds—like a prosthetic leg—that help him remain mobile.
Neli, left, and Banu, right, share with a neighbor how to use the In Touch Messenger.
As new believers, they met, fell in love, and married. They were determined not to let their disabilities have the final word—they would love and worship the Lord regardless of their circumstances. And perhaps because of those circumstances, they gained an audience with others. Locals couldn’t understand at first how such “unlucky people” could be both successful and full of joy. But as God put their favor and wisdom on display, the community began turning to Banu and Neli for all kinds of advice. The couple listen to the Messenger for personal edification and then share it with others, knowing the power of God’s Word to transform lives. And the body of Christ is growing—Banu and Neli have a plot of land on which they hope to build a church soon to meet the needs of a congregation.
Blessed to be a Blessing
As we reflect on our experiences with Alex in the Philippines and Gede in Indonesia—two dynamic leaders who are making the most of every opportunity with a tool like the Messenger—we’re left to consider, “Why not us? Could we do the same?” These men humbly seek the will of the Lord for their community and trust Him to guide their decisions, and we can too.
What is possible in our own neighborhoods? As we wait and listen for God’s guidance, let’s pray for these new friends in Southeast Asia. Near and far, as the Lord transforms communities and sets people free, we rejoice in the true source of everlasting peace and joy.