In Touch Ministries staff April 6, 2025
Ten supernatural signs and freedom after four centuries of Egyptian slavery—it’s hard to imagine the enormity of such a pinnacle event. But the exodus was even more than a remarkable fact of Israelite history. As is often the case with Old Testament accounts, details of the Passover story are linked to the New Testament, where Jesus revealed their expanded, more profound meaning.
Illustration by Sol Cotti
As His people prepared for liberation, God had them roast a lamb to eat with unleavened bread (Exodus 12:8) and mark their doorway with its blood. Then the Lord would “pass over” Hebrew homes when carrying out the final plague—death to every firstborn. To memorialize the miraculous deliverance, God instituted a yearly festival (Exodus 12:22-24), which Jesus and His disciples observed.
Final words and actions can have profound impact. So someone facing death is likely to approach encounters more thoughtfully.
Jesus, “knowing [He] … was going back to God, got up from supper” to wash His disciples’ feet (vv. 3-4). Explore the connection between dwindling time and unconventional words or deeds. In what ways might realizing everyone’s life is “a vapor that appears for a little while and then vanishes” (James 4:14) motivate you to share the gospel? To express love or appreciation?
Read John 13:5. The disciples had observed Passover often and knew the ceremony well. Instead of the ritual handwashing, however, Jesus unexpectedly went around the room and washed their feet. Try to remember some familiar event—like a service, meeting, or holiday celebration—that was changed in a startling way. Recalling the effect it had on you, how do you think the disciples might have reacted? Consider what the Lord’s purpose might have been in deviating from expectations.
The disciples must also have been startled when their Teacher bent down to perform such a lowly task. Picture yourself in their place. How might you respond if a respected pastor or professor were to serve you in some humble way? When Peter openly expressed his discomfort, Jesus said, “If I do not wash you, you have no part with Me” (v. 8). In saying that, what do you think He wanted Peter—and us—to understand?
Jesus also applied new meaning to the Passover bread and wine.
The Israelite slaves were driven from Egypt in haste; having no time for bread to rise, they baked it without yeast (Exodus 12:39). In contrast to this literal use of unleavened, note the word’s symbolic usage in 1 Corinthians 5:6-8. Explain the meaning of “Christ our Passover ... has been sacrificed.” What, then, does being “unleavened” (v. 7) look like for us as Christians?
Unleavened bread at Passover had been a reminder of Hebrew slavery and liberation. But now Jesus called it His body and told His disciples, “Take, eat” (Matthew 26:26). What are some of the ways we, as believers, partake of the Lord?
Luke 22:20 tells us that after supper, Jesus also shared wine and called it His blood. Read Exodus 12:21-23 and John 1:29 to discover parallels in the Old and New Testaments with regard to the lamb, blood, and bondage. What light does that shed on our salvation from sin?
Traditional practices have their place, but so do innovations when they are of the Lord.
Graduations are called “commencements,” as they mark not just an ending but also a beginning. Similarly, Passover was both Jesus’ Last Supper and His opportunity to present a new covenant and a new command (John 13:34). We honor Him by loving and serving one another.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org