In Touch Ministries staff March 9, 2025
Many of us recall the “sticks and stones” maxim that claimed, “Words can never hurt me.” But Scripture tells us that is not the case. Last month, we looked into the power of language and read James’s warning about its destructive potential. He referred to the tongue as “a restless evil and full of deadly poison” that can set the course of our life on fire (James 3:6; James 3:8). Thankfully, though, there’s more to the story, and this month we’ll explore the sweet side of speech.
Illustration by Sol Cotti
In the early days of the church, the apostle Paul sent letters to several young Christian congregations. His purpose was to instruct them how to live in a way that was holy and pleasing to God.
A holy, or set-apart, life stands out for the right reasons and reflects positively on Jesus.
Paul draws a strict contrast between two opposing ways of living: the ways of darkness and light (vv. 6-10). He singles out the immorality, impurity, and greed that characterize walking in darkness (v. 3). What do verses 9-10 say characterize the “fruit of light”?
The impure fruit of darkness is not to be present in a believer’s life—and should even be far from the mouth (vv. 3, 12). Why do you think it’s not just action that matters but also speech?
Notice that verses 1-2 say to imitate Christ, who was “an offering and a sacrifice to God as a fragrant aroma.” We must do something similar in our life. Discuss things we might have to give up—especially regarding our speech—as we “walk as children of Light” (v. 8).
Paul gives a few examples to encourage us toward using only the pure speech that pleases God. What would it look like to speak to other believers in “psalms and hymns and spiritual songs” (v. 19)?
With regard to speech that is fitting as we walk in the light, verse 20 repeats the importance of conveying our gratitude. Why is thanksgiving so fundamental to gracious language? How does expressing it frequently help to change your heart and the words of your mouth?
What other encouragement to sweet speech does God’s Word offer?
Pleasant words are compared to a honeycomb (Proverbs 16:24). Talk about the sensory experiences this brings to mind and how they relate to your words.
Read Ephesians 4:29. Give examples of language in the categories of “unwholesome” and “edifying.” Can you think of a time someone spoke in a way that “gave you grace”? Imagine a favorite dish with either too little flavor or an overpowering amount. What do you think it means to “let your speech always be with grace, as though seasoned with salt” (Colossians 4:6)?
Consider memorizing Proverbs 15:1, which says, “A gentle answer turns away wrath, but a harsh word stirs up anger.” In what situations do you find it most challenging to respond gently, and how can you apply this verse to help you make a better choice?
The Holy Spirit will help us know both what to say and the way to say it.
In His kindness, the Lord let us know in advance that we will one day be required to give an account for every carelessly spoken word (Matthew 12:36). What a blessing to be able to turn to Christ now for forgiveness—and to develop patterns of conduct and conversation that are pleasing to God.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org