In Touch Ministries staff January 12, 2025
Jesus called believers “the light of the world” and told us to shine our light for others to see (Matthew 5:14-16). Sometimes that means witnessing about the Savior, especially to those who know little about Him. There’s no telling what could happen in such moments, but as the apostle Paul demonstrated at the Areopagus, when we rely on the Holy Spirit and are willing to testify, we might be amazed by far-reaching results.
Illustration by Abbey Lossing
On his second missionary journey, Paul planted churches in a number of cities. Some Jews from Thessalonica, convinced that the apostle was a threat, formed a mob to harm him. So Paul was sent to Athens for his safety.
Human beings have an innate hunger for God. Only Jesus can satisfy it, though many try unsuccessfully to do so with something else.
Athens was “full of idols” (v. 16). The Greek word kateidólos comes from kata, “intensively,” and eidolon, “utterly idolatrous.” Strong’s Concordance translates it as “wholly given to idolatry.” Besides being filled with physical statues, Athens was a city whose people had chosen to worship a variety of gods, including the one true God of whom they had little knowledge. How does this help you see the passage as not just historical but also relevant to your life? What things are people choosing to worship as idols today?
Paul’s “spirit was being provoked within him” (v. 16). How is this different from saying, for example, “Paul became angry”? As you answer, consider God’s words: “I will … put a new spirit within you” (Ezekiel 36:26).
We often pray for an opening to witness to a specific person, but Paul had a different strategy. In Athens, he shared the gospel in public with “those who happened to be present” (Acts 17:17). You may not be called to “street preaching,” but Paul’s actions are an encouragement regarding the role of the Holy Spirit. How might He be preparing you to speak of Jesus wherever you are?
The Athenians showed a willingness to listen and brought Paul to the Areopagus, where others could hear him.
Paul said the Athenians were “very religious in all respects” (v. 22). Strong’s Concordance suggests that by “very religious,” Paul was being considerate, acknowledging their respect for the divine. How might this fairness and charity have affected the conversation? Can you think of a situation where a similar approach might have gained you a listener’s trust?
The Athenians even had an altar dedicated to “an unknown god” (v. 23). Consider how this reveals the innate desire of all people to find God and, at the same time, the difficulty they have in doing so. Think about those around you. Can you now understand how their desire for things like money, beauty, and pleasure might actually be a misplaced hunger for God?   To speak God’s truth in a way that ministers to those who need Jesus, we must rely on the Holy Spirit—He alone can see the hearts of others. But love, empathy, patience, and even creative thinking are always valuable. How did Paul show these traits in Athens?
Paul’s speech is a treasured example of how to witness effectively to a culture in need of God.
Cutting through the clamor of desire can be frustrating, but the Holy Spirit will show you compassion. Let Paul’s words—“He is not far from each one of us” (v. 27)—be an encouragement to shine Christ’s light and help others find His truth.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org