In Touch Ministries staff August 16, 2024
None of us have ever seen God, so it can be hard to picture what He is like. Our image of God is likely shaped by a parent, a pastor, or some other authority figure we’ve known. But since all these people are imperfect, we run the risk of letting their faults distort our understanding of the Lord. Perhaps that’s why the Bible goes to great lengths describing His character as full of kindness and compassion.
Illustration by Stephanie Wunderlich
In Exodus 3:13-15, God identified Himself by name for the first time. Before making promises to Israel through His servant and eventually entering into a covenant with His chosen people, God wanted to help Moses understand who He truly was.
Exodus 33:18-23, Exodus 34:1-8
When speaking to Moses in today’s passage, God describes Himself even more fully as “the Lord, the Lord God, compassionate and merciful, slow to anger, and abounding in faithfulness and truth” (Exodus 34:6). Think back to what you were first taught about God. Do the descriptions in this verse fit your earliest impressions of Him?
The Hebrew word hesed (here translated as “faithfulness”) is most often expressed in English as “steadfast or faithful love,” “mercy,” “lovingkindness,” “goodness,” or “kindness.” When the Lord passed by Moses to present Himself, these are the concepts He chose to highlight, even saying He abounds in these things. How does knowing the words God uses to define Himself impact the way you describe Him to others? Reread verse 6 and reflect on each of the words and phrases God selected. Do any new thoughts or feelings come to mind?
The idea of God being known for His lovingkindness, or hesed, is a theme in the Old Testament, mentioned around 250 times! The psalmists sing of His faithful, caring kindness; the prophets speak of His tender, unwavering love. Over and over, the God who introduced Himself as merciful and overflowing in love reminds His people that’s who He is, who He’s always been, and who He always will be. We see this in His faithful care both for Israel and for individuals like Hagar and Hannah. Where else in Scripture do you see God’s kindness emphasized?
Long before He spoke with Moses—and every day since—God has expressed His lovingkindness toward all creation.
In Romans 2:4, Paul says not to overlook the importance of “the riches of His kindness”—a reminder that God’s kindness is what leads us to repentance. Can you think of instances in your life when this was the case? What people or experiences have impacted the way you understand God’s character and posture towards you?
We see God the Father most clearly in His Son (John 14:9). Jesus taught with compassion and wisdom, healed all kinds of illnesses, and ate with outcasts. Ultimately, He took our sins upon Himself, forging the path to eternal life. Where do you see God’s kindness in Jesus—both in the Gospels and in your own life?
Recognizing that Scripture describes God as merciful and kind toward us can change our view of Him, ourselves, and others.
What picture of God do you think you reflect to others? How might you more intentionally represent Him by being gentle and kind?
If we give the Old Testament just a cursory look, God can seem stern or even angry and intolerant. But from the beginning, He presents Himself as overflowing in compassion and mercy. He invites us to know the kindness poured out through His unending love—and also to demonstrate our obedience by showing hesed to others (Micah 6:8).
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org