In Touch Ministries staff February 2, 2025
Words can seem insignificant. After all, they aren’t actions, so what harm can they do? But the letter of James pulls no punches on this very topic in his epistle: Words are powerful, he tells us, and they steer our lives. That’s both good and bad. Thankfully, when our speech is Spirit-led, it’ll direct us where we really want to go—toward ever greater intimacy with God, loving fellowship with His people, and wisdom to benefit the world.
Illustration by João Fazenda
James, the brother of Jesus, is writing to Jewish Christians in the early years of the church. His letter contains wisdom on issues that confront believers today.
Do you hope for sinless speech or dismiss it as impossible?
Teaching in the church is a role appointed by God (1 Corinthians 12:28). Why might it incur “a stricter judgment” (James 3:1)? When answering, keep in mind the link between responsibility and accountability. Also consider the fact that James follows this warning with another about the power of the tongue.
James acknowledges that all believers stumble (v. 2). The Greek here means “to sin, err, or transgress.” What does the verse say is the difference between sinning “in what [we say]” and stumbling in other ways? Give a few examples of sinning with words.
The word perfect (v. 2) often calls to mind impossibility. But Jesus instructed us to “be perfect” (Matthew 5:48), so He will make it possible. We need to understand that perfection is a process that takes place over a lifetime and at the Lord’s direction. (See 1 Peter 5:10.) What does that tell you about the possibility of sinless speech?
·he comparisons to a horse’s bit and ship’s rudder indicate that wiser speech will lead us to a better outcome (James 3:3-4). They both use the verb metagó, which means “to turn about, direct, or bring back.” How does this hint at the roles of forgiveness and sanctification?
Errant words can have serious consequences.
Our natural speech is likened to a destructive fire (vv. 5-6). What “forest” might poorly chosen words set aflame? List some examples of Spirit-driven speech that would be more in keeping with a Christlike life. For inspiration, try reading Ephesians 4:29 or Galatians 5:22-23.
Earlier, James wrote, “If anyone thinks himself to be religious, and yet does not bridle his tongue … this man’s religion is worthless” (James 1:26). Yet verse 3:8 says “no one … can tame the tongue.” Can you now explain the balance of discipline and dependence on God in this seeming contradiction?
Does the word curse in verse 9 surprise you? Ask the Holy Spirit to let you know when your words fall into this unwanted category of speech.
Verses 11-12 suggest that when our speech isn’t befitting the Spirit who resides within us, it’s an indication we’ve fallen into old behavior patterns and are walking according to the flesh. Has inappropriate speech ever made you feel like “a fig tree ... produc[ing] olives”? Discuss how prayer or rejoicing in the Lord might help avoid this.
The tongue has immense power for better or worse, depending on how we use it.
Imagine the difference “a word fitly spoken” (Proverbs 25:11 ESV) can have on others’ lives—and our own.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org