In Touch Ministries staff July 11, 2025
1 Corinthians 9:24-27
1 Thessalonians 2:18-20
Do you ever wish the Bible revealed more about what happens after we die? Yes, Christians immediately enter the Lord’s presence when our earthly life ends, but what awaits us in heaven? Although much has not been disclosed, this is certain: “We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may be recompensed for his deeds in the body, according to what he has done, whether good or bad” (2 Corinthians 5:10).
Illustration by Xoana Herrera
The word translated “judgment seat”—béma—simply means a platform. It was a place of honor where a dignitary sat. The Corinthians would have associated it with the Olympic games, which took place in a stadium just outside the city. There, the winner would ascend the stage to receive the prize from a leading citizen.
1 Corinthians 3:9-15; 1 Corinthians 4:1-5
These passages reveal what Christ will evaluate in our lives, how and when He will do so, and what He desires to give us.
Using an analogy of believers as God’s building, Paul points out that we’re each responsible for how we build on the foundation of Christ. We aren’t saved by works, but God has prepared good works for us to do (Ephesians 2:8-10). He wants us to discover and accomplish them so He can reward our faithful obedience. Have you recognized certain types of service as something God intends specifically for you? If not, ask for clear direction about how to serve Him.
The judgment seat of Christ is like a fire that tests the quality of our works. Some of the things we’ve done will be shown to be of no eternal value. The Greek word phaulos—which refers not to moral evil but to that which is worthless—may relate to misplaced priorities, neglected opportunities, or service done with the wrong motives. Try to think of works that appear good but may fall into this category. We won’t be recognized for them, but we won’t lose the ultimate reward of heaven.
On the other hand, deeds initiated and empowered by the Holy Spirit are represented by materials like gold, silver, and precious stones. These are works that will survive the fire, ones for which we’ll receive a reward. How might you assess whether a pursuit has eternal value?
The following passages mention crowns (at times translated as “wreaths”) believers can earn. For each, what must one do to be the recipient?
• 1 Corinthians 9:24-27: imperishable crown
• 1 Thessalonians 2:18-20: crown of rejoicing
• 2 Timothy 4:6-8: crown of righteousness
• James 1:12 and Revelation 2:10: crown of life
• 1 Peter 5:1-4: crown of glory
Worldly prizes honor recipients, whereas spiritual prizes glorify God.
Some Christians think only great acts of service or sacrifice will be acknowledged by God. Yet which simple acts of devotion did Jesus say His Father would reward? (See Matthew 6:1-6, Matthew 16:1-28; Matthew 18:1-35.) And what attitude did He warn would negate the reward?
Christ’s parable in Luke 19:11-27 indicates that the Lord holds us responsible for what He entrusts to us personally. Describe the actions of the three slaves and the master’s response to each. How do you think the idea of investment applies in your life?
The promise of rewards is not intended to discourage us or cause us to frantically seize opportunities for earning them. Instead, they should be a motivation to abide in Christ like a branch in a vine (John 15:1-11). Thank God for relationships, abilities, and gifts He’s entrusted to you as His steward, and pray for wisdom about how best to use them.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org