In Touch Ministries staff May 11, 2025
Does God laugh? And if so, is it okay for us to laugh with Him? Our first response might be a hearty No! Since Scripture characterizes the Lord as holy and worthy of all honor, we might assume the proper response is reverent worship, not merriment. Yet He also commands us to rejoice. Turns out, there’s a good deal of laughter in the Bible, and our Father would probably like to hear more of it from His children.
Illustration by Sol Cotti
Often, in describing God’s impact, the psalmists were essentially saying, We were in despair but then remembered God’s presence and work in our lives. Now we’re so jubilant we can’t stop dancing and singing!
It would be awkward to sing and dance exuberantly without laughing! God intends for His presence in our lives to lead to joy.
All throughout Scripture, we see God working toward His people’s restoration and liberation. In Psalm 30, David testifies to this: After being in the depths, he is lifted up; His mourning has turned to dancing, and instead of wearing sackcloth, he’s “girded ... with gladness” (v. 11). When have you experienced a reversal from weeping to joyfulness? Describe the experience of having opposite emotions back-to-back.
Of course, there’s more than one way to laugh. Scripture tells of negative laughter, including mockery of God or His followers and exultation over unjust victories (Nehemiah 2:19 NKJV). But even here, reversal is possible. Sarah laughed in disbelief at the thought of a pregnancy in her old age (Genesis 18:12), yet months later she laughed again—with pleasure this time—as her first child was born (Genesis 21:6). What kinds of things might make adverse laughter turn positive?
The psalmist’s progression from suffering to singing is echoed in Ecclesiastes, which acknowledges that life includes times to weep and mourn as well as times to laugh and rejoice (Ecclesiastes 3:4). In fact, laughter and sadness can overlap. If that’s happened to you, what did you learn from the seemingly contradictory experience?
In taking on flesh and coming to earth, Jesus intended not to condemn the world but to save it—and to bring great joy.
Look at the birth announcements about Jesus that are found in the Gospels. The newly pregnant Mary broke into song, her words reminiscent of psalms praising God for changing hard times to good (Luke 1:46-55). Angels told shepherds Jesus’ birth was news that would mean joy for all people (Luke 2:10). And after seeing the star, the Magi “rejoiced exceedingly” (Matthew 2:10). Think of a time you received wonderful news. How did you respond? What did a moment of rejoicing teach you about the Lord?
Bible accounts show that God doesn’t want to frighten us into obedience. His desire is to bless us with salvation and His presence—and to hear a response of utter delight. What has moved you to praise Him enthusiastically? How might you bring more praise into everyday moments?
Jesus and the epistle writers urged us to rejoice even in difficulties (Matthew 5:11-12; James 1:2), for they knew God was present and at work in all situations. What have you discovered from times of adversity in which God met you?
In His holiness, God invites our heartfelt worship—at times expressed even through laughing or dancing with uncontainable delight.
When life includes seasons of suffering, loss, and grief, we can and should worship reverently, as well as lament. Yet God is always meeting us, leading us toward His redemption and blessing. Even if we cannot find the strength to laugh with Him today, we can trust that one day we will be filled with joy in His presence.
New American Standard Bible - NASB 1995 Copyright © 1960, 1971, 1977, 1995, by The Lockman Foundation, La Habra, Calif. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
For Permission to Quote Information visit www.Lockman.org